Over a million students have travelled from across the world to come to the United States to seek the best higher education possible. Every year, thousands of more students begin their journey to the U.S. to pursue their degrees. With the threat of COVID-19 and its impact on in-person communications, an increasing number of international students will need to rely on the internet to find the information that they need. The International Education Assistant, developed from IBM Watson Assistant, provides international students the convenience and simplicity of a chatbot that answers the needs of students that are in the process of applying to postsecondary education in the United States through a conversational format. Generally, information needed for documents are scattered across the websites of various federal departments, which makes it difficult to pinpoint. The chatbot consolidates the scattered information into an easy to access format and redirects students to official resources, thereby reducing the problems and confusion that they may encounter during the application process.

By teaching the chatbot how to respond to a number of prompts that prospective students may ask, the corresponding answers can be more accurately returned when compared with a simple web search. Using a web search engine with the prompt “F-1 Visa” returns a number of federal government, school, and other websites which contain varying levels of information on the same subject, and it can be difficult to determine which sources are more accurate. Navigating through just the government websites alone can be daunting as applicants are presented with information from uscis.gov, ice.gov, travel.state.gov, and studyinthestates.dhs.gov on the same topic. Using the chatbot, look-up terms such as “Visa” and “Work” provide information to the user that can be further explored through links to vetted government websites. Necessary documents and forms for the application process can also be queried using their form number, official name, usage, as well as commonly referred to names (e.g. Form I-7979A can be searched for with “Notice of Action”, “Notice of approval”, “Notify that the I-901 SEVIS Fee is paid”, etc.). Accurately reading prompts of various lengths and complexity is vital to returning the correct information. 

Many international students may not know how to begin the application process other than searching for generic terms such as “how to study in the United States.” Our goal with the International Education Assistant is to structure the chatbot in a way that conveniently guides the user through the process. Users are initially prompted with an infographic of the overall process broken down into 8 steps. Terms found within the infographic can be queried and more detailed explanations given. The same information can be found on government websites, but are often cluttered with additional information on other topics and can be confusing for the reader. In the chatbot, the user is given control of the learning process the entire time by designing the chatbot to return only the necessary amount of information at the pace that the user decides. In addition, the chatbot has a number of links to government websites on the requested topic for further reading. For example, information regarding COVID-19 directs the user towards the corresponding federal government website for the latest updates. Another advantage of the chatbot is its informal, text-based format. Due to potential language barriers, prospective students may find it daunting to contact federal agencies directly and may be afraid to ask for help. Students that are not confident in their English speaking abilities can use the chatbot to obtain information in a less stressful environment and go at their own pace when going through the process.

The problem that our chatbot aims to solve is one that every international student in the U.S. has probably encountered. It is a specific issue that they have already overcome. However, the current system has fallen short for the students that may have declined to study abroad in the U.S. due to the complexity of the application process. This chatbot solution is a simple one and doesn’t change the system, but seeks to alleviate some of the confusion associated with it. It acts as a companion throughout the process and gives pointers in the right direction. While not technologically complex, the goal of our chatbot and its impact on international students can be significant.
